---
layout: post
title: Modelling Market Dynamics on Short Timescales
---

<script src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>


## The Chicken Analogy for Folds
- You start with a chicken and feed it, then it grows into another chicken. Now feed it a whole list of food in sequence. 
- In a left fold, we feed it some food, see what happens, then feed it food again. A right fold is like "well, the resulting chicken (the ultimate chicken if you will) is equivalent to if we fed the last piece of food to the penultimate chicken. And so on.
- Note that in both cases the values are consumed from left to right. 
- Thinking of the initial value as an accumulator only makes sense for left folds.
- The chicken analogy breaks down ones you get more complicated data structures.

## General Folds

More generally, if you have a recursive data structure, then you need one argument for every constructor in the data structure.
- Now the analogy is like items and gems in Diablo 2. Recall that you can combine low runes, plus gems, to make high runes. 
- f is like the Horadric cube, and there can be many different cubes. 
- The initial value is like: we have an unlimited number of copies of the worst item (say the El rune), but a limited supply of gems (contained in your data structure). 
- At each step, we combine a bunch of items (one for every data structure) with a bunch of gems (one for each value contained at that recursion step, usually this is one) and get a new item. 
- If we get a null data structure (there are no items or gems to combine) then we just default to the worst item.
- For a list you only need 2 arguments because there are 2 constructors: the value, and the tail.  

### Binary Tree Example

```haskell
data Tree a = Node (Tree a) a (Tree a)
treeFold :: b -> (b -> a -> b -> b) -> Tree a -> b
treeFold e _ Empty        = e
treeFold e f (Node l x r) = f (treeFold e f l) x (treeFold e f r)
```

Here `a` is a gem and `b` are the items. We have a big supply of the worst item (`e`), a tree of gems, and we want to make a big item. The fold tells us how. 


### General Tree

```haskell
data Tree a = Tree a [Tree a]
Note that we do not allow empty trees, and that a leaf is a tree with an empty list of subtrees.

treeFold :: (a -> [b] -> b) -> Tree a -> b
treeFold f (Tree x s) = f x (map (treeFold f) s)
```

Here each step of the recursion contains an indefinite number of items, so the function needs to operate on a whole list of them. Again `a` is a gem and `b` are the items. 
Note that map takes care of the base case, and the default item is part of the definition of `f`, namely it is `f x [ ]`.